<br>

I live in SA, and while our 1.8 million people is a much smaller population than Germany's, our electricity grid is
non-trivial and big enough to serve as a model, or perhaps a warning, for others aspiring to a high penetration of
intermittent renewables.

*Renewables*, in the SA context, is restricted to wind turbines and solar panels. This Australian state, over double the size of Germany, is one of the driest places on the planet. So, unlike Germany, we have virtually no forests we
can burn or rivers we can dam. 

Ours has been, and still is, a real world experiment in bolting high levels of wind and solar power 
onto a grid. We have enough solar panels feeding the grid at times that we need to centrally 
disconnect them. But on a still, 40 degree C, night we need over three gigawatts to be available to
run air conditioners and the rest of our lives.

In 2016, we had a statewide blackout that was intimately connected with our renewable energy rollout; and
getting the grid back up again wasn't quick or easy. You can test a building evacuation from time to time
without too much fuss, but not so a statewide grid restart! And things which aren't tested have a habit of
failing, which it did. But this article isn't about the past, it's about the future; the steeply rising part
of that chart above.

### The evolution of the SA grid

First a little background. As I said, the SA grid isn't a toy.  It has 200,000 km of overhead cables, 77,000 transformers
and 400 zone substations spread over 178,000 square kilometers. Over the past 6 years, the SA grid manager has replaced
1,700 of the transformers during the past 6 years. It's a complicated process to do safely. So if you do something requiring a transformer upgrade, like add so much rooftop PV that you overload your transformers, it's going to take a while; unless you can find an army of out-of-work linespeople. 

There are a number of public and private
organisations working together to operate Australia's grid(s). It's a veritable acronym jungle which isn't helped when
Governments sack organisations, rename them, or reallocate responsibilities from time to time. I'll try and keep things
as simple as possible, but no simpler.

SA closed it's last coal power plant in 2016. 

