
You can see that once the heat wave locks in, the wind pattern shifts into sync and when demand is at its maximum, wind power is pretty much AWOL. This synchronisation isn't a rare event; I first noticed it in an AEMO report on a heatwave in 2009, and you can be sure that professional experts at AEMO have known about it forever. And even if it did only happen a few times a decade, our need for reliable power peaks precisely during *every* such event. 
Those demand peaks corresponded to well over 40 degrees C; 49 degrees C in some parts of the state. 

Adelaide is blessed with a flying fox colony in the heart of the city, in 2019 there were about 30,000 animals in
this colony. On the first day of that heat wave, the youngest started falling from trees. A team of rescuers saved
as many as they could. By the end of Thursday, all available aviary space was full and rescuing had to stop. We had
some 400 rescued animals needing care and feeding. On Friday, all we could do at the colony was a little spraying
and just watch animals drop from the trees. They were either dead before hitting the ground or shortly after. 
About 8,000 in total. Nobody 
could really keep count of the black plastic bags of dead animals. Adelaide Council staff were picking up stinking
corpses for weeks after.

As a result, Adelaide Council has installed high rise (30+ metres)
sprinklers in the trees at the heart of the colony. It would be disastrous to have spent the money on the sprinklers only
to have the electric pumps fail for lack of power when they are most needed. Also on that Friday, the wind slipped out
of synch and started blowing hot and dusty from the north and attention [flipped from dying animals](https://knowledge.aidr.org.au/resources/black-summer-bushfires-sa-2019-20/) to terrified home owners in the hills around the city and on Kangaroo Island just of the coast.  

### The evolution of the SA grid

First a little background on the SA electricity grid. The SA grid isn't massive by any standard, but
it isn't a toy. A [2023 AEMO study](https://aemo.com.au/-/media/files/electricity/nem/security_and_reliability/congestion-information/sa-transition-to-fewer-synch-gen-grid-reference.pdf) (to be discussed later) looked at international "studies" of high penetration renewables and they are truly trivial. Calling them micro-grids would be a grandiose exaggeration. A few megawatts of wind or solar and some batteries; ho, hum. Every piece of research has to start this way, but it doesn't have to be sold like it's a global energy solution if it kind of works ... sometimes. 

SA is a gigawatt scale grid. It has 200,000 km of overhead cables, 77,000 transformers
and 400 zone substations spread over 178,000 square kilometers. 

Over the past 6 years, the SA Power Networks (the 
grid operating entity) has replaced
some 1,700 of the transformers.  

Why does that matter? 

If we make changes to our 
electricity system requiring widespread transformer upgrades,  
like adding so much rooftop PV that you overload transformers installed 40 years ago, 
or have significant amounts
of power running backwards at levels never anticipated when the grid was designed, 
then that upgrade is going to take a while! The ignorant focus of our Australian Energy Minister Chris Bowen
on the cost of generating electricity is like the person ordering a skinny latte 
on-line and wondering why it costs so much. The
cost of electricity is dominated by the cost of delivery, not production. 

Break the grid and not only will decarbonisation be glacially slow, it will be incredibly expensive. 

SA closed it's last coal power plant in 2016. 

Also in 2016, and not conincidentally, we 
had a statewide blackout; and
getting the grid back up again wasn't quick or easy. You can test a building evacuation from time to time
without too much fuss, but not so a statewide grid restart! And things which aren't tested have a habit of
failing, which it did. But this article isn't about the past, it's about the future; the steeply rising part
of that renewable energy expert chart above.

At the time the last coal power plant closed, we only had two. The chart below lists the total output of the plants, but
both Northern and Playford B were composed of various smaller generators. A single large power plant would create considerable risks in a small grid like ours. 



